<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Rome. A street.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Judges, Senators and Tribunes, with MARTIUS and QUINTUS, bound, passing on to the place of execution; TITUS going before, pleading</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hear me, grave fathers! noble tribunes, stay!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In dangerous wars, whilst you securely slept;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all my blood in Rome’s great quarrel shed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the frosty nights that I have watch’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for these bitter tears, which now you see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be pitiful to my condemned sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose souls are not corrupted as ‘ ’tis thought.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For two and twenty sons I never wept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because they died in honour’s lofty bed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Lieth down; the Judges, etc., pass by him, and Exeunt</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>For these, these, tribunes, in the dust I write</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart’s deep languor and my soul’s sad tears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let my tears stanch the earth’s dry appetite;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sons’ sweet blood will make it shame and blush.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That shall distil from these two ancient urns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than youthful April shall with all his showers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In summer’s drought I’ll drop upon thee still;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In winter with warm tears I’ll melt the snow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keep eternal spring-time on thy face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou refuse to drink my dear sons’ blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter LUCIUS, with his sword drawn</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O reverend tribunes! O gentle, aged men!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let me say, that never wept before,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tears are now prevailing orators.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O noble father, you lament in vain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tribunes hear you not; no man is by;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you recount your sorrows to a stone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grave tribunes, once more I entreat of you⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, ’tis no matter, man; if they did hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They would not mark me, or if they did mark,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They would not pity me, yet plead I must;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, though they cannot answer my distress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet in some sort they are better than the tribunes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that they will not intercept my tale:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I do weep, they humbly at my feet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive my tears and seem to weep with me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, were they but attired in grave weeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome could afford no tribune like to these.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A stone is soft as wax⁠—tribunes more hard than stones;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A stone is silent, and offendeth not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rises</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>But wherefore stand’st thou with thy weapon drawn?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To rescue my two brothers from their death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For which attempt the judges have pronounced</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My everlasting doom of banishment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O happy man! they have befriended thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tigers must prey, and Rome affords no prey</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But me and mine: how happy art thou, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From these devourers to be banished!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who comes with our brother Marcus here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter MARCUS and LAVINIA</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if not so, thy noble heart to break:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Will it consume me? let me see it, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>This was thy daughter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Why, Marcus, so she is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>Ay me, this object kills me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, Lavinia, what accursed hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath made thee handless in thy father’s sight?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What fool hath added water to the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or brought a faggot to bright-burning Troy?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My grief was at the height before thou camest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now like Nilus, it disdaineth bounds.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me a sword, I’ll chop off my hands too;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they have nursed this woe, in feeding life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In bootless prayer have they been held up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they have served me to effectless use:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now all the service I require of them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is that the one will help to cut the other.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>‘ ’Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For hands, to do Rome service, are but vain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr’d thee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, that delightful engine of her thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That blabb’d them with such pleasing eloquence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, like a sweet melodious bird, it sung</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet varied notes, enchanting every ear!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, thus I found her, straying in the park,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeking to hide herself, as doth the deer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath received some unrecuring wound.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It was my deer; and he that wounded her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath hurt me more than had he killed me dead:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now I stand as one upon a rock</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Environed with a wilderness of sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Expecting ever when some envious surge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This way to death my wretched sons are gone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here stands my other son, a banished man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here my brother, weeping at my woes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It would have madded me: what shall I do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now I behold thy lively body so?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast no hands, to wipe away thy tears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor tongue, to tell me who hath martyr’d thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy husband he is dead: and for his death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy brothers are condemn’d, and dead by this.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look, Marcus! ah, son Lucius, look on her!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey-dew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon a gather’d lily almost wither’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Perchance she weeps because they kill’d her husband;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perchance because she knows them innocent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because the law hath ta’en revenge on them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no, they would not do so foul a deed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or make some sign how I may do thee ease:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall thy good uncle, and thy brother Lucius,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou, and I, sit round about some fountain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How they are stain’d, as meadows, yet not dry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With miry slime left on them by a flood?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the fountain shall we gaze so long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And made a brine-pit with our bitter tears?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or shall we cut away our hands, like thine?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pass the remainder of our hateful days?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What shall we do? let us, that have our tongues,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plot some deuce of further misery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make us wonder’d at in time to come.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet father, cease your tears; for, at your grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Patience, dear niece. Good Titus, dry thine eyes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Marcus, Marcus! brother, well I wot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou, poor man, hast drown’d it with thine own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mark, Marcus, mark! I understand her signs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to her brother which I said to thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, what a sympathy of woe is this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As far from help as Limbo is from bliss!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter AARON</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AARON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Titus Andronicus, my lord the emperor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sends thee this word⁠—that, if thou love thy sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let Marcus, Lucius, or thyself, old Titus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or any one of you, chop off your hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And send it to the king: he for the same</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will send thee hither both thy sons alive;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that shall be the ransom for their fault.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O gracious emperor! O gentle Aaron!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did ever raven sing so like a lark,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That gives sweet tidings of the sun’s uprise?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all my heart, I’ll send the emperor My hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good Aaron, wilt thou help to chop it off?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay, father! for that noble hand of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath thrown down so many enemies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall not be sent: my hand will serve the turn:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My youth can better spare my blood than you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore mine shall save my brothers’ lives.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Which of your hands hath not defended Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rear’d aloft the bloody battle-axe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Writing destruction on the enemy’s castle?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, none of both but are of high desert:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My hand hath been but idle; let it serve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ransom my two nephews from their death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then have I kept it to a worthy end.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AARON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For fear they die before their pardon come.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>My hand shall go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>By heaven, it shall not go!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sirs, strive no more: such wither’d herbs as these</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me redeem my brothers both from death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, for our father’s sake and mother’s care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now let me show a brother’s love to thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Agree between you; I will spare my hand.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>Then I’ll go fetch an axe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>But I will use the axe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt LUCIUS and MARCUS</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come hither, Aaron; I’ll deceive them both:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AARON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i> If that be call’d deceit, I will be honest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never, whilst I live, deceive men so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I’ll deceive you in another sort,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that you’ll say, ere half an hour pass. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cuts off TITUS’s hand</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter LUCIUS and MARCUS</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now stay your strife: what shall be is dispatch’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good Aaron, give his majesty my hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him it was a hand that warded him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From thousand dangers; bid him bury it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More hath it merited; that let it have.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for my sons, say I account of them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As jewels purchased at an easy price;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AARON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I go, Andronicus: and for thy hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look by and by to have thy sons with thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their heads, I mean. O, how this villany</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aaron will have his soul black like his face. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, here I lift this one hand up to heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bow this feeble ruin to the earth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If any power pities wretched tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that I call! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To LAVINIA</i> What, wilt thou kneel with me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do, then, dear heart; for heaven shall hear our prayers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with our sighs we’ll breathe the welkin dim,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O brother, speak with possibilities,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do not break into these deep extremes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then be my passions bottomless with them.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>But yet let reason govern thy lament.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If there were reason for these miseries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then into limits could I bind my woes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o’erflow?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Threatening the welkin with his big-swoln face?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the sea; hark, how her sighs do blow!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is the weeping welkin, I the earth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then must my sea be moved with her sighs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then must my earth with her continual tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Become a deluge, overflow’d and drown’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For why my bowels cannot hide her woes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But like a drunkard must I vomit them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then give me leave, for losers will have leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a Messenger, with two heads and a hand</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that good hand thou sent’st the emperor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here are the heads of thy two noble sons;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here’s thy hand, in scorn to thee sent back;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy griefs their sports, thy resolution mock’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That woe is me to think upon thy woes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than remembrance of my father’s death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now let hot AEtna cool in Sicily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be my heart an ever-burning hell!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These miseries are more than may be borne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But sorrow flouted at is double death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet detested life not shrink thereat!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever death should let life bear his name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where life hath no more interest but to breathe! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">LAVINIA kisses TITUS</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As frozen water to a starved snake.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>When will this fearful slumber have an end?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, farewell, flattery: die, Andronicus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou dost not slumber: see, thy two sons’ heads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy warlike hand, thy mangled daughter here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy other banish’d son, with this dear sight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Struck pale and bloodless; and thy brother, I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even like a stony image, cold and numb.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, now no more will I control thy griefs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rend off thy silver hair, thy other hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gnawing with thy teeth; and be this dismal sight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The closing up of our most wretched eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now is a time to storm; why art thou still?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Ha, ha, ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Why dost thou laugh? it fits not with this hour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, I have not another tear to shed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides, this sorrow is an enemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And would usurp upon my watery eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make them blind with tributary tears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then which way shall I find Revenge’s cave?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For these two heads do seem to speak to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And threat me I shall never come to bliss</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till all these mischiefs be return’d again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in their throats that have committed them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, let me see what task I have to do.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You heavy people, circle me about,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I may turn me to each one of you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The vow is made. Come, brother, take a head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this hand the other I will bear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lavinia, thou shalt be employ’d: these arms!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy teeth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for thee, boy, go get thee from my sight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hie to the Goths, and raise an army there:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if you love me, as I think you do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s kiss and part, for we have much to do. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt TITUS, MARCUS, and LAVINIA</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell Andronicus, my noble father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wofull’st man that ever lived in Rome:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, proud Rome; till Lucius come again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He leaves his pledges dearer than his life:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, would thou wert as thou tofore hast been!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in oblivion and hateful griefs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make proud Saturnine and his empress</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beg at the gates, like Tarquin and his queen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now will I to the Goths, and raise a power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A room in Titus’s house. A banquet set out.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter TITUS, MARCUS, LAVINIA and Young LUCIUS, a boy</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, so; now sit: and look you eat no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than will preserve just so much strength in us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cannot passionate our tenfold grief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With folded arms. This poor right hand of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is left to tyrannize upon my breast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, when my heart, all mad with misery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then thus I thump it down. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To LAVINIA</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wound it with sighing, girl, kill it with groans;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or get some little knife between thy teeth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And just against thy heart make thou a hole;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May run into that sink, and soaking in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, brother, fie! teach her not thus to lay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such violent hands upon her tender life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now! has sorrow made thee dote already?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What violent hands can she lay on her life?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bid AEneas tell the tale twice o’er,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How Troy was burnt and he made miserable?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, handle not the theme, to talk of hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest we remember still that we have none.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if we should forget we had no hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If Marcus did not name the word of hands!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, let’s fall to; and, gentle girl, eat this:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here is no drink! Hark, Marcus, what she says;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can interpret all her martyr’d signs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She says she drinks no other drink but tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brew’d with her sorrow, mesh’d upon her cheeks:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thy dumb action will I be as perfect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As begging hermits in their holy prayers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I of these will wrest an alphabet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by still practise learn to know thy meaning.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Young LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, the tender boy, in passion moved,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth weep to see his grandsire’s heaviness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace, tender sapling; thou art made of tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tears will quickly melt thy life away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">MARCUS strikes the dish with a knife</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>At that that I have kill’d, my lord; a fly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Out on thee, murderer! thou kill’st my heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine eyes are cloy’d with view of tyranny:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A deed of death done on the innocent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes not Titus’ brother: get thee gone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see thou art not for my company.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Alas, my lord, I have but kill’d a fly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But how, if that fly had a father and mother?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How would he hang his slender gilded wings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And buzz lamenting doings in the air!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor harmless fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, with his pretty buzzing melody,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Came here to make us merry! and thou hast kill’d him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon me, sir; it was a black ill-favor’d fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to the empress’ Moor; therefore I kill’d him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, O, O,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then pardon me for reprehending thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou hast done a charitable deed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me thy knife, I will insult on him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flattering myself, as if it were the Moor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come hither purposely to poison me.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s for thyself, and that’s for Tamora.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, sirrah!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, I think, we are not brought so low,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that between us we can kill a fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, poor man! grief has so wrought on him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He takes false shadows for true substances.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, take away. Lavinia, go with me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll to thy closet; and go read with thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sad stories chanced in the times of old.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, boy, and go with me: thy sight is young,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
