<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Rome. Before the Capitol.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The Tomb of the ANDRONICI appearing; the Tribunes and Senators aloft. Enter, below, from one side, SATURNINUS and his Followers; and, from the other side, BASSIANUS and his Followers; with drum and colours</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Noble patricians, patrons of my right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Defend the justice of my cause with arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, countrymen, my loving followers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plead my successive title with your swords:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am his first-born son, that was the last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wore the imperial diadem of Rome;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let my father's honours live in me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Romans, friends, followers, favorers of my right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep then this passage to the Capitol</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And suffer not dishonour to approach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To justice, continence and nobility;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let desert in pure election shine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS, aloft, with the crown</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Princes, that strive by factions and by friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ambitiously for rule and empery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A special party, have, by common voice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In election for the Roman empery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For many good and great deserts to Rome:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A nobler man, a braver warrior,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lives not this day within the city walls:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He by the senate is accit'd home</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From weary wars against the barbarous Goths;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, with his sons, a terror to our foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath yoked a nation strong, train'd up in arms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten years are spent since first he undertook</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This cause of Rome and chastised with arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our enemies' pride: five times he hath return'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In coffins from the field;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now at last, laden with horror's spoils,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us entreat, by honour of his name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom worthily you would have now succeed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the Capitol and senate's right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom you pretend to honour and adore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you withdraw you and abate your strength;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dismiss your followers and, as suitors should,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td>How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Marcus Andronicus, so I do ally</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thy uprightness and integrity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so I love and honour thee and thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I will here dismiss my loving friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to my fortunes and the people's favor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt the followers of BASSIANUS</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thank you all and here dismiss you all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to the love and favor of my country</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commit myself, my person and the cause. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt the followers of SATURNINUS</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome, be as just and gracious unto me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am confident and kind to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Open the gates, and let me in.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td>Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS go up into the Capitol</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a Captain</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Romans, make way: the good Andronicus.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Successful in the battles that he fights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With honour and with fortune is return'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From where he circumscribed with his sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brought to yoke, the enemies of Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drums and trumpets sounded. Enter MARTIUS and MUTIUS; After them, two Men bearing a coffin covered with black; then LUCIUS and QUINTUS. After them, TITUS ANDRONICUS; and then TAMORA, with ALARBUS, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, AARON, and other Goths, prisoners; Soldiers and people following. The Bearers set down the coffin, and TITUS speaks</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hail, Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, as the bark, that hath discharged her fraught,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Returns with precious jading to the bay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To re-salute his country with his tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou great defender of this Capitol,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand gracious to the rites that we intend!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Half of the number that King Priam had,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These that survive let Rome reward with love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These that I bring unto their latest home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With burial amongst their ancestors:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Titus, unkind and careless of thine own,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make way to lay them by their brethren. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The tomb is opened</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O sacred receptacle of my joys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many sons of mine hast thou in store,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou wilt never render to me more!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before this earthy prison of their bones;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That so the shadows be not unappeased,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor we disturb'd with prodigies on earth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I give him you, the noblest that survives,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The eldest son of this distressed queen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay, Roman brethren! Gracious conqueror,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A mother's tears in passion for her son:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, think my son to be as dear to me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To beautify thy triumphs and return,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But must my sons be slaughter'd in the streets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For valiant doings in their country's cause?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, if to fight for king and commonweal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were piety in thine, it is in these.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Draw near them then in being merciful:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thrice noble Titus, spare my first-born son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These are their brethren, whom you Goths beheld</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alive and dead, and for their brethren slain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Religiously they ask a sacrifice:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To this your son is mark'd, and die he must,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To appease their groaning shadows that are gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away with him! and make a fire straight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consumed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS, and MUTIUS, with ALARBUS</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td>O cruel, irreligious piety!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CHIRON</td>
							<td>Was ever Scythia half so barbarous?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">DEMETRIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alarbus goes to rest; and we survive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tremble under Titus' threatening looks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, madam, stand resolved, but hope withal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With opportunity of sharp revenge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May favor Tamora, the Queen of Goths--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Goths were Goths and Tamora was queen--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS and MUTIUS, with their swords bloody</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See, lord and father, how we have perform'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our Roman rites: Alarbus' limbs are lopp'd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose smoke, like incense, doth perfume the sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remaineth nought, but to inter our brethren,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let it be so; and let Andronicus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make this his latest farewell to their souls. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets sounded, and the coffin laid in the tomb</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>In peace and honour rest you here, my sons;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Secure from worldly chances and mishaps!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here grow no damned grudges; here are no storms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No noise, but silence and eternal sleep:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In peace and honour rest you here, my sons!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter LAVINIA</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LAVINIA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In peace and honour live Lord Titus long;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My noble lord and father, live in fame!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I render, for my brethren's obsequies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shed on the earth, for thy return to Rome:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, bless me here with thy victorious hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserved</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lavinia, live; outlive thy father's days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, below, MARCUS ANDRONICUS and Tribunes; re-enter SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS, attended</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Thanks, gentle tribune, noble brother Marcus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And welcome, nephews, from successful wars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You that survive, and you that sleep in fame!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in your country's service drew your swords:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But safer triumph is this funeral pomp,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath aspired to Solon's happiness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And triumphs over chance in honour's bed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Send thee by me, their tribune and their trust,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This palliament of white and spotless hue;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And name thee in election for the empire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With these our late-deceased emperor's sons:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be candidatus then, and put it on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And help to set a head on headless Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A better head her glorious body fits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than his that shakes for age and feebleness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What should I don this robe, and trouble you?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be chosen with proclamations to-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And set abroad new business for you all?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And led my country's strength successfully,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And buried one and twenty valiant sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In right and service of their noble country</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me a staff of honour for mine age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not a sceptre to control the world:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td>Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Patience, Prince Saturninus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Romans, do me right:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Patricians, draw your swords: and sheathe them not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till Saturninus be Rome's emperor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Andronicus, would thou wert shipp'd to hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rather than rob me of the people's hearts!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That noble-minded Titus means to thee!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Content thee, prince; I will restore to thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The people's hearts, and wean them from themselves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But honour thee, and will do till I die:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will most thankful be; and thanks to men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of noble minds is honourable meed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>People of Rome, and people's tribunes here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I ask your voices and your suffrages:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tribunes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To gratify the good Andronicus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gratulate his safe return to Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The people will accept whom he admits.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tribunes, I thank you: and this suit I make,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you create your emperor's eldest son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Saturnine; whose virtues will, I hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ripen justice in this commonweal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, if you will elect by my advice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crown him and say 'Long live our emperor!'</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With voices and applause of every sort,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Patricians and plebeians, we create</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Saturninus Rome's great emperor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say 'Long live our Emperor Saturnine!' <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A long flourish till they come down</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Titus Andronicus, for thy favors done</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To us in our election this day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will with deeds requite thy gentleness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for an onset, Titus, to advance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy name and honourable family,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lavinia will I make my empress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It doth, my worthy lord; and in this match</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hold me highly honour'd of your grace:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King and commander of our commonweal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wide world's emperor, do I consecrate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sword, my chariot and my prisoners;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presents well worthy Rome's imperial lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine honour's ensigns humbled at thy feet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome shall record, and when I do forget</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The least of these unspeakable deserts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Romans, forget your fealty to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To TAMORA</i> Now, madam, are you prisoner to an emperor;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him that, for your honour and your state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will use you nobly and your followers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A goodly lady, trust me; of the hue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I would choose, were I to choose anew.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though chance of war hath wrought this change of cheer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou comest not to be made a scorn in Rome:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Princely shall be thy usage every way.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rest on my word, and let not discontent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Daunt all your hopes: madam, he comforts you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lavinia, you are not displeased with this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LAVINIA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not I, my lord; sith true nobility</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Warrants these words in princely courtesy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, sweet Lavinia. Romans, let us go;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ransomless here we set our prisoners free:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and drum. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. SATURNINUS courts TAMORA in dumb show</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td>Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Seizing LAVINIA</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>How, sir! are you in earnest then, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, noble Titus; and resolved withal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do myself this reason and this right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Suum cuique' is our Roman justice:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This prince in justice seizeth but his own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>And that he will, and shall, if Lucius live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Traitors, avaunt! Where is the emperor's guard?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Treason, my lord! Lavinia is surprised!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td>Surprised! by whom?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By him that justly may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear his betroth'd from all the world away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt BASSIANUS and MARCUS with LAVINIA</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MUTIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brothers, help to convey her hence away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with my sword I'll keep this door safe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MUTIUS</td>
							<td>My lord, you pass not here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, villain boy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Barr'st me my way in Rome? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stabbing MUTIUS</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MUTIUS</td>
							<td>Help, Lucius, help! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dies</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">During the fray, SATURNINUS, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON and AARON go out and re-enter, above</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter LUCIUS</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, you are unjust, and, more than so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sons would never so dishonour me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Traitor, restore Lavinia to the emperor.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dead, if you will; but not to be his wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is another's lawful promised love. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, Titus, no; the emperor needs her not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll trust, by leisure, him that mocks me once;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confederates all thus to dishonour me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was there none else in Rome to make a stale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That said'st I begg'd the empire at thy hands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>O monstrous! what reproachful words are these?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But go thy ways; go, give that changing piece</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him that flourish'd for her with his sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>These words are razors to my wounded heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And therefore, lovely Tamora, queen of Goths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will create thee empress of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my choice?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here I swear by all the Roman gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sith priest and holy water are so near</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tapers burn so bright and every thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In readiness for Hymenaeus stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not re-salute the streets of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or climb my palace, till from forth this place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I lead espoused my bride along with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And here, in sight of heaven, to Rome I swear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She will a handmaid be to his desires,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ascend, fair queen, Pantheon. Lords, accompany</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your noble emperor and his lovely bride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There shall we consummate our spousal rites. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but TITUS</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am not bid to wait upon this bride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dishonour'd thus, and challenged of wrongs?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter MARCUS, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Titus, see, O, see what thou hast done!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, foolish tribune, no; no son of mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath dishonour'd all our family;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unworthy brother, and unworthy sons!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But let us give him burial, as becomes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give Mutius burial with our brethren.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Traitors, away! he rests not in this tomb:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This monument five hundred years hath stood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I have sumptuously re-edified:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Repose in fame; none basely slain in brawls:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bury him where you can; he comes not here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, this is impiety in you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My nephew Mutius' deeds do plead for him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He must be buried with his brethren.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUINTUS<br/>
							MARTIUS</td>
							<td>And shall, or him we will accompany.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>'And shall!' what villain was it that spake that word?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUINTUS</td>
							<td>He that would vouch it in any place but here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>What, would you bury him in my despite?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pardon Mutius and to bury him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, with these boys, mine honour thou hast wounded:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My foes I do repute you every one;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, trouble me no more, but get you gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARTIUS</td>
							<td>He is not with himself; let us withdraw.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUINTUS</td>
							<td>Not I, till Mutius' bones be buried. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">MARCUS and the Sons of TITUS kneel</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Brother, for in that name doth nature plead,--</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUINTUS</td>
							<td>Father, and in that name doth nature speak,--</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>Renowned Titus, more than half my soul,--</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td>Dear father, soul and substance of us all,--</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His noble nephew here in virtue's nest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That died in honour and Lavinia's cause.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a Roman; be not barbarous:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That slew himself; and wise Laertes' son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did graciously plead for his funerals:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be barr'd his entrance here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rise, Marcus, rise.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be dishonour'd by my sons in Rome!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, bury him, and bury me the next. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">MUTIUS is put into the tomb</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneeling</i> No man shed tears for noble Mutius;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He lives in fame that died in virtue's cause.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, to step out of these dreary dumps,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know not, Marcus; but I know it is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is she not then beholding to the man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That brought her for this high good turn so far?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Re-enter, from one side, SATURNINUS attended, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON and AARON; from the other, BASSIANUS, LAVINIA, and others</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, Bassianus, you have play'd your prize:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And you of yours, my lord! I say no more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor wish no less; and so, I take my leave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My truth-betrothed love and now my wife?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let the laws of Rome determine all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meanwhile I am possess'd of that is mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis good, sir: you are very short with us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, if we live, we'll be as sharp with you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASSIANUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, what I have done, as best I may,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Answer I must and shall do with my life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only thus much I give your grace to know:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all the duties that I owe to Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is in opinion and in honour wrong'd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in the rescue of Lavinia</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With his own hand did slay his youngest son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In zeal to you and highly moved to wrath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be controll'd in that he frankly gave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive him, then, to favor, Saturnine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath express'd himself in all his deeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A father and a friend to thee and Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis thou and those that have dishonour'd me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I have loved and honour'd Saturnine!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My worthy lord, if ever Tamora</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then hear me speak in indifferently for all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, madam! be dishonour'd openly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And basely put it up without revenge?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should be author to dishonour you!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But on mine honour dare I undertake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For good Lord Titus' innocence in all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, at my suit, look graciously on him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to SATURNINUS</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>be won at last;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dissemble all your griefs and discontents:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are but newly planted in your throne;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon a just survey, take Titus' part,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so supplant you for ingratitude,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yield at entreats; and then let me alone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll find a day to massacre them all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And raze their faction and their family,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cruel father and his traitorous sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom I sued for my dear son's life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make them know what 'tis to let a queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, come, sweet emperor; come, Andronicus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td>Rise, Titus, rise; my empress hath prevail'd.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank your majesty, and her, my lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A Roman now adopted happily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And must advise the emperor for his good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day all quarrels die, Andronicus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let it be mine honour, good my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have reconciled your friends and you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you, Prince Bassianus, I have pass'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My word and promise to the emperor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you will be more mild and tractable.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fear not lords, and you, Lavinia;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By my advice, all humbled on your knees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall ask pardon of his majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LUCIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We do, and vow to heaven and to his highness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That what we did was mildly as we might,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tendering our sister's honour and our own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MARCUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td>That, on mine honour, here I do protest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td>Away, and talk not; trouble us no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TAMORA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not be denied: sweet heart, look back.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Marcus, for thy sake and thy brother's here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do remit these young men's heinous faults: Stand up.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lavinia, though you left me like a churl,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I found a friend, and sure as death I swore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not part a bachelor from the priest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, if the emperor's court can feast two brides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day shall be a love-day, Tamora.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">TITUS ANDRONICUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To-morrow, an it please your majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hunt the panther and the hart with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With horn and hound we'll give your grace bonjour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SATURNINUS</td>
							<td>Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
