<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Plains near Rome.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</b> with an army of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goths</b>, with drum and colours.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Approved warriors, and my faithful friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have received letters from great Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which signify what hate they bear their emperor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And how desirous of our sight they are.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imperious and impatient of your wrongs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wherein Rome hath done you any scath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him make treble satisfaction.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Goth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose high exploits and honourable deeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be bold in us: we’ll follow where thou lead’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like stinging bees in hottest summer’s day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Led by their master to the flowered fields,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be avenged on cursed Tamora.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All the Goths</td>
							<td>And as he saith, so say we all with him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goth</b>, leading <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</b> with his Child in his arms.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Goth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To gaze upon a ruinous monastery;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as I earnestly did fix mine eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the wasted building, suddenly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I heard a child cry underneath a wall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I made unto the noise; when soon I heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The crying babe controll’d with this discourse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had nature lent thee but thy mother’s look,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They never do beget a coal-black calf.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peace, villain, peace!”⁠—even thus he rates the babe⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, when he knows thou art the empress’ babe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will hold thee dearly for thy mother’s sake.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With this, my weapon drawn, I rush’d upon him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To use as you think needful of the man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That robb’d Andronicus of his good hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the pearl that pleased your empress’ eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here’s the base fruit of his burning lust.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This growing image of thy fiend-like face?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why dost not speak? what, deaf? not a word?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A halter, soldiers! hang him on this tree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by his side his fruit of bastardy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td>Touch not the boy; he is of royal blood.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Too like the sire for ever being good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sight to vex the father’s soul withal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Get me a ladder. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A ladder brought, which <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</b> is made to ascend.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lucius, save the child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear it from me to the empress.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou do this, I’ll show thee wondrous things,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That highly may advantage thee to hear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll speak no more but “Vengeance rot you all!”</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say on: an if it please me which thou speak’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy child shall live, and I will see it nourish’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An if it please thee! why, assure thee, Lucius,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I must talk of murders, rapes and massacres,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Acts of black night, abominable deeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Complots of mischief, treason, villainies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this shall all be buried by my death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>Tell on thy mind; I say thy child shall live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td>Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who should I swear by? thou believest no god:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What if I do not? as, indeed, I do not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, for I know thou art religious</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hast a thing within thee called conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I have seen thee careful to observe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore I urge thy oath; for that I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An idiot holds his bauble for a god</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that I’ll urge him: therefore thou shalt vow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By that same god, what god soe’er it be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou adorest and hast in reverence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else I will discover nought to thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>Even by my god I swear to thee I will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td>First know thou, I begot him on the empress.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>O most insatiate and luxurious woman!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twas her two sons that murder’d Bassianus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They cut thy sister’s tongue and ravish’d her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cut her hands and trimm’d her as thou saw’st.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>O detestable villain! call’st thou that trimming?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, she was wash’d and cut and trimm’d, and ’twas</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trim sport for them that had the doing of it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>O barbarous, beastly villains, like thyself!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That codding spirit had they from their mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As sure a card as ever won the set;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bloody mind, I think, they learn’d of me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As true a dog as ever fought at head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I train’d thy brethren to that guileful hole</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wrote the letter that thy father found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hid the gold within the letter mention’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confederate with the queen and her two sons:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I play’d the cheater for thy father’s hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when I had it, drew myself apart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pry’d me through the crevice of a wall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When, for his hand, he had his two sons’ heads;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beheld his tears, and laugh’d so heartily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That both mine eyes were rainy like to his:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when I told the empress of this sport,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She swooned almost at my pleasing tale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Goth</td>
							<td>What, canst thou say all this, and never blush?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td>Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even now I curse the day⁠—and yet, I think,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Few come within the compass of my curse⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein I did not some notorious ill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As kill a man, or else devise his death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accuse some innocent and forswear myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set deadly enmity between two friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make poor men’s cattle break their necks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid the owners quench them with their tears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oft have I digg’d up dead men from their graves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And set them upright at their dear friends’ doors,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even when their sorrows almost were forgot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have with my knife carved in Roman letters,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As willingly as one would kill a fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And nothing grieves me heartily indeed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that I cannot do ten thousand more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bring down the devil; for he must not die</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So sweet a death as hanging presently.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If there be devils, would I were a devil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To live and burn in everlasting fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I might have your company in hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to torment you with my bitter tongue!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goth</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Goth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, there is a messenger from Rome</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Desires to be admitted to your presence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>Let him come near.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aemilius</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Welcome, Aemilius: what’s the news from Rome?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aemilius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord Lucius, and you princes of the Goths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Roman emperor greets you all by me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for he understands you are in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He craves a parley at your father’s house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Willing you to demand your hostages,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they shall be immediately deliver’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Goth</td>
							<td>What says our general?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Aemilius, let the emperor give his pledges</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto my father and my uncle Marcus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we will come. March away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Rome. Before <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus’s</b> house.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chiron</b>, disguised.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will encounter with Andronicus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say I am Revenge, sent from below</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knock at his study, where, they say, he keeps,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And work confusion on his enemies. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They knock.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b>, above.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who doth molest my contemplation?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is it your trick to make me ope the door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That so my sad decrees may fly away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all my study be to no effect?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are deceived: for what I mean to do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See here in bloody lines I have set down;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what is written shall be executed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>Titus, I am come to talk with thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, not a word; how can I grace my talk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wanting a hand to give it action?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>If thou didst know me, thou wouldest talk with me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am not mad; I know thee well enough:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness these trenches made by grief and care;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness the tiring day and heavy night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness all sorrow, that I know thee well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For our proud empress, mighty Tamora:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not thy coming for my other hand?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is thy enemy, and I thy friend:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am Revenge; sent from the infernal kingdom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come down, and welcome me to this world’s light;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confer with me of murder and of death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s not a hollow cave or lurking-place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No vast obscurity or misty vale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where bloody murder or detested rape</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can couch for fear, but I will find them out;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be a torment to mine enemies?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>I am; therefore come down, and welcome me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do me some service, ere I come to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now give me some surance that thou art Revenge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then I’ll come and be thy wagoner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whirl along with thee about the globe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hale thy vengeful wagon swift away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And find out murderers in their guilty caves:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when thy car is loaden with their heads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will dismount, and by the wagon-wheel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trot, like a servile footman, all day long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even from Hyperion’s rising in the east</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until his very downfall in the sea:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And day by day I’ll do this heavy task,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>These are my ministers, and come with me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td>Are these thy ministers? what are they call’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rapine and Murder; therefore called so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good Lord, how like the empress’ sons they are!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, the empress! but we worldly men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if one arm’s embracement will content thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will embrace thee in it by and by. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit above.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This closing with him fits his lunacy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate’er I forge to feed his brain-sick fits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, being credulous in this mad thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make him send for Lucius his son;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll find some cunning practise out of hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, at the least, make them his enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b> below.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Welcome, dread Fury, to my woeful house:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How like the empress and her sons you are!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could not all hell afford you such a devil?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For well I wot the empress never wags</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in her company there is a Moor;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, would you represent our queen aright,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It were convenient you had such a devil:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But welcome, as you are. What shall we do?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td>Show me a murderer, I’ll deal with him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chiron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Show me a villain that hath done a rape,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am sent to be revenged on him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will be revenged on them all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look round about the wicked streets of Rome;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when thou find’st a man that’s like thyself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good Murder, stab him; he’s a murderer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thou with him; and when it is thy hap</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To find another that is like to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good Rapine, stab him; he’s a ravisher.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thou with them; and in the emperor’s court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a queen, attended by a Moor;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well mayst thou know her by thy own proportion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For up and down she doth resemble thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pray thee, do on them some violent death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have been violent to me and mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well hast thou lesson’d us; this shall we do.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But would it please thee, good Andronicus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid him come and banquet at thy house;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will bring in the empress and her sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The emperor himself and all thy foes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at thy mercy shalt they stoop and kneel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What says Andronicus to this device?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td>Marcus, my brother! ’tis sad Titus calls.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid him repair to me, and bring with him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him the emperor and the empress too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This do thou for my love; and so let him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As he regards his aged father’s life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</td>
							<td>This will I do, and soon return again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now will I hence about thy business,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take my ministers along with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else I’ll call my brother back again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to her sons.</i> What say you, boys? will you bide with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles I go tell my lord the emperor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I have govern’d our determined jest?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tarry with him till I turn again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I know them all, though they suppose me mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will o’erreach them in their own devices:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td>Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell, Andronicus: Revenge now goes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lay a complot to betray thy foes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td>I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chiron</td>
							<td>Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tut, I have work enough for you to do.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Publius</b> and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Publius</td>
							<td>What is your will?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td>Know you these two?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Publius</td>
							<td>The empress’ sons, I take them, Chiron and Demetrius.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceived;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one is Murder, Rape is the other’s name;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stop their mouths, if they begin to cry. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i> <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Publius</b>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> lay hold on <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chiron</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chiron</td>
							<td>Villains, forbear! we are the empress’ sons.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Publius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And therefore do we what we are commanded.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is he sure bound? look that you bind them fast.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lavinia</b>; he bearing a knife, and she a basin.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, Lavinia; look, thy foes are bound.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let them hear what fearful words I utter.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O villains, Chiron and Demetrius!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here stands the spring whom you have stain’d with mud,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This goodly summer with your winter mix’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You kill’d her husband, and for that vile fault</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two of her brothers were condemn’d to death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My hand cut off and made a merry jest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inhuman traitors, you constrain’d and forced.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What would you say, if I should let you speak?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst that Lavinia ’tween her stumps doth hold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The basin that receives your guilty blood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You know your mother means to feast with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with your blood and it I’ll make a paste,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And of the paste a coffin I will rear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make two pasties of your shameful heads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid that strumpet, your unhallow’d dam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to the earth swallow her own increase.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the feast that I have bid her to,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And worse than Progne I will be revenged:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He cuts their throats.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive the blood: and when that they are dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me go grind their bones to powder small</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with this hateful liquor temper it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in that paste let their vile heads be baked.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, come, be every one officious</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make this banquet; which I wish may prove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More stern and bloody than the Centaurs’ feast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, now bring them in, for I’ll play the cook,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see them ready ’gainst their mother comes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt, bearing the dead bodies.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Court of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus’s</b> house. A banquet set out.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goths</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</b> prisoner.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Uncle Marcus, since it is my father’s mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I repair to Rome, I am content.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Goth</td>
							<td>And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till he be brought unto the empress’ face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For testimony of her foul proceedings:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see the ambush of our friends be strong;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear the emperor means no good to us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Some devil whisper curses in mine ear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The venomous malice of my swelling heart!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away, inhuman dog! unhallow’d slave!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goths</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</b>. Flourish within.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The trumpets show the emperor is at hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aemilius</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tribunes</b>, Senators, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>What, hath the firmament more suns than one?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td>What boots it thee to call thyself a sun?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rome’s emperor, and nephew, break the parle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These quarrels must be quietly debated.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The feast is ready, which the careful Titus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath ordain’d to an honourable end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your places.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>Marcus, we will. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hautboys sound. The Company sit down at table.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b> dressed like a Cook, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lavinia</b> veiled, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Young Lucius</b>, and others. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b> places the dishes on the table.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, my gracious lord; welcome, dread queen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because I would be sure to have all well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To entertain your highness and your empress.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An if your highness knew my heart, you were.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord the emperor, resolve me this:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was it well done of rash Virginius</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To slay his daughter with his own right hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because she was enforced, stain’d, and deflower’d?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>It was, Andronicus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td>Your reason, mighty lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because the girl should not survive her shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by her presence still renew his sorrows.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For me, most wretched, to perform the like.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee; <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kills <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lavinia</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, with thy shame, thy father’s sorrow die!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kill’d her, for whom my tears have made me blind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am as woeful as Virginius was,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have a thousand times more cause than he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do this outrage: and it now is done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>What, was she ravish’d? tell who did the deed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td>Will’t please you eat? will’t please your highness feed?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</td>
							<td>Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not I; ’twas Chiron and Demetrius:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They ravish’d her, and cut away her tongue;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they, ’twas they, that did her all this wrong.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>Go fetch them hither to us presently.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, there they are both, baked in that pie;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis true, ’tis true; witness my knife’s sharp point. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kills <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tamora</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</td>
							<td>Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kills <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can the son’s eye behold his father bleed?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s meed for meed, death for a deadly deed! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kills <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Saturninus</b>. A great tumult. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</b>, and others go up into the balcony.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By uproar sever’d, like a flight of fowl</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scatter’d by winds and high tempestuous gusts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, let me teach you how to knit again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This scatter’d corn into one mutual sheaf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These broken limbs again into one body;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she whom mighty kingdoms court’sy to,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do shameful execution on herself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grave witnesses of true experience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot induce you to attend my words,</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</b>.</i> Speak, Rome’s dear friend, as erst our ancestor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When with his solemn tongue he did discourse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To love-sick Dido’s sad attending ear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The story of that baleful burning night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam’s Troy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch’d our ears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or who hath brought the fatal engine in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart is not compact of flint nor steel;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But floods of tears will drown my oratory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And break my utterance, even in the time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When it should move you to attend me most,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lending your kind commiseration.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here is a captain, let him tell the tale;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, noble auditory, be it known to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cursed Chiron and Demetrius</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were they that murdered our emperor’s brother;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they it were that ravished our sister:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our father’s tears despised, and basely cozen’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that true hand that fought Rome’s quarrel out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sent her enemies unto the grave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lastly, myself unkindly banished,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gates shut on me, and turn’d weeping out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To beg relief among Rome’s enemies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who drown’d their enmity in my true tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the turned forth, be it known to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have preserved her welfare in my blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from her bosom took the enemy’s point,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My scars can witness, dumb although they are,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That my report is just and full of truth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to the Child in the arms of an Attendant.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this was Tamora delivered;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The issue of an irreligious Moor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chief architect and plotter of these woes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The villain is alive in Titus’ house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as he is, to witness this is true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or more than any living man could bear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have we done aught amiss⁠—show us wherein,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, from the place where you behold us now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The poor remainder of Andronici</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make a mutual closure of our house.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aemilius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lucius our emperor; for well I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The common voice do cry it shall be so.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td>Lucius, all hail, Rome’s royal emperor!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, go into old Titus’ sorrowful house, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To Attendants.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hither hale that misbelieving Moor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As punishment for his most wicked life. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Attendants.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</b>, and the others descend.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td>Lucius, all hail, Rome’s gracious governor!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To heal Rome’s harms, and wipe away her woe!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For nature puts me to a heavy task:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand all aloof: but, uncle, draw you near,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kissing <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titus</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain’d face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The last true duties of thy noble son!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O were the sum of these that I should pay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come hither, boy; come, come, and learn of us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To melt in showers: thy grandsire loved thee well:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many a time he danced thee on his knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many a matter hath he told to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meet and agreeing with thine infancy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that respect, then, like a loving child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because kind nature doth require it so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Friends should associate friends in grief and woe:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Young Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would I were dead, so you did live again!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Attendants with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aemilius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You sad Andronici, have done with woes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give sentence on this execrable wretch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath been breeder of these dire events.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If any one relieves or pities him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the offence he dies. This is our doom:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some stay to see him fasten’d in the earth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aaron</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am no baby, I, that with base prayers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should repent the evils I have done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would I perform, if I might have my will:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If one good deed in all my life I did,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do repent it from my very soul.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Some loving friends convey the emperor hence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give him burial in his father’s grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father and Lavinia shall forthwith</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be closed in our household’s monument.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for that heinous tiger, Tamora,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No mournful bell shall ring her burial;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But throw her forth to beasts and birds of prey:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, being so, shall have like want of pity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See justice done on Aaron, that damn’d Moor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By whom our heavy haps had their beginning:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, afterwards, to order well the state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That like events may ne’er it ruinate. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
